Hello, colleagues. My name is Smirnova Nadezhda. I work in the Moscow Business School. I teach
at the Russian Academy of Sciences named after Plikhanov. I am a candidate for economics
and a lecturer. I have more than 30 consulting projects behind me, some of which are dedicated
to the management of human resources at the enterprise. Today we will talk about the introductory
course in the management of human resources. We will talk with you about the introduction
of the management system of human resources, we will talk about how the HR strategy is
developed and implemented at the enterprise, and we will pay attention to how the efficiency
of the HR service is assessed. For the owners of the company, the goal of their activities
is to ensure the quality of their business. Today, when an assessment is made of an enterprise,
the correlation between the main assets and the market value is assessed in a slightly different
way than some time ago. Previously, it was believed that the market value was mainly determined
by the main assets of the enterprise. The share was about 90%. At the moment, this share has
decreased. An important role in the formation of the company's value is played by the brand,
the value of human capital, personnel, people, and, of course, the know-how technologies that
the company possesses. We are talking about human resources, about personnel. As a rule,
in Western companies, we observe a situation where the percentage of the company's market
value from the value of the personnel is up to 35%. Traditionally, it was believed that the
personnel is a cost factor. The expenses for the personnel are costs. In the mergers and
acquisitions, these costs were not taken into account, and the cost of the personnel was not
taken into account either. Accordingly, the HR service was considered as the center of costs.
The HR service was self-managed. The owners were not interested in its activities. The main
thing is that there were no lawsuits. If we talk about development, we are now observing
a situation where the costs for the employees are considered as investments. Accordingly,
human capital, its value is taken into account in mergers and acquisitions. HR becomes a
business partner. This means that it participates in the development of the company's business
goals and business strategies. It does not only formally process the company's strategy,
it also participates in this process. Moreover, when evaluating the activities and values that the
HR service brings into the company's activities, not only the managers of this service, but also
the managers of other companies' departments, who take into account the financial side, the
side related to the market development in the HR service's activities, are considered.
Naturally, in such a state, the activities of the HR director and his services influence the
company as a whole, form value both for internal and external clients. This means that the
owners begin to be interested in the HR service's position.
At one time, the famous economist and manager Mr. Ulerich said that the management system
and human resources can become the source of such capabilities of an organization that will
be able to use new opportunities for its own benefit.
It is not for nothing that the economic theory says that one of the most important factors
of production is human capital, or as it is commonly called in slang, labor. Human capital
is a huge asset. It is a huge asset that is not only a human capital, but also a source
of human resources. We buy human resources, but unlike machines, human resources eventually
gain value, because they have the opportunity to learn by themselves and learn by the policy
and procedures provided by the company.
The HR director and his services are responsible for the management of human resources.
It can be said that there are only four important goals for the HR service.
They are to create a path of choice for the central self-management mechanism, that is,
to determine the main guidelines for the participants of internal processes and procedures,
to form effective internal procedures and processes.
Another goal is to form motivational motives for the staff. The motives that will allow
the person who works in this company to realize his personal goals through the achievement
of the company's goals. That is, the motives that the person will have will be responsible
for the company's strategy of development.
Another goal of the HR service is to ensure transparency. This means that the regulation
of procedures and relations, the establishment of corporate culture, the establishment of
a chain of career growth, professional growth, the establishment of a fair reward system.
And probably the last goal that should be noted is the goal related to the creation of a positive
psychological climate, with the creation of trust in the company, in the organization of
the company, in the organization of the employees. Moreover, we live in a very dynamic world,
and therefore the company is forced to constantly change in accordance with changing external
conditions. Or maybe it is necessary to change these external conditions.
Of course, this is impossible without something changing inside the company.
And this means that the HR, the head of staff, is faced with issues related to the organization
of internal changes, which are impossible without the formation of loyalty of the staff,
without defining internal rules.
The first model that we will consider within the framework of this topic is the Harvard
model of the human resources management system. This model was proposed by the famous economist
Beer. The model assumes that the choice of HR policy, that is, the choice of policy of
the impact on the employee, the choice of the policy of the formation of a reward system or
a system of motivation of the staff, and so on, it is not just a wish of the owner or the
head of the service. It is formed by analyzing the situation in which the company exists.
These are external factors characterized, for example, by demographic conditions.
These are internal factors, for example, characteristics related to the philosophy of management,
which is used in the company.
Of course, the choice of policy in the field of HR is not just a wish of the owner or the
head of the service. The choice of policy in the field of HR is made taking into account
the interests of all interested groups, that is, internal and external clients.
Line managers, employees and owners are certainly related to internal clients.
If we talk about external interested parties, then this is a very important issue.
We are talking about the local community, about clients, about investors.
All this imposes a certain imprint, which should be reflected when developing HR strategy,
HR policy.
After the implementation, we get some results.
We achieve adherence, we achieve higher efficiency of activities.
The costs that were carried out become more effective.
Thus, we have some long-term consequences related to organizational efficiency,
related to the growth of public welfare.
These long-term consequences close our model.
They influence the situation in which the company exists,
and the interests of stakeholders, who we had to take into account in HR policy.
Because then we diagnose stakeholders' interests again,
we diagnose the situation in the company again,
and we correct the policy in the field of HR.
We get new results in accordance with the tasks set.
At the same time, another model is being developed,
which was called HR cycle.
It was developed by Fond Brunon.
This model tells us that the most important factor that we would like to achieve
in the field of HR is the productivity of the work,
in fact, the efficiency of the results of the company's employees.
Of course, all the HR practices that must be carried out at the enterprise
have an impact on this important category.
This includes selection of staff, assessment of staff,
system of rewards and development of staff.
Note that selection and development of staff are connected by a dotted line.
There is also an influence between them.
If a company is ready to grow its staff from a young age,
and, for example, it takes students of the second year,
and attracts them to a particular activity
in order to get loyal employees in the future,
then it will take significant investment to develop these young guys.
At the same time, if a company decides that its strategy is to buy heads,
then we believe that they will develop in a different place,
and we will use the results of this development.
Patricia McLagan proposed the HR Practice wheel model,
which showed that the results and value of the HR activities
are connected with certain roles,
which should be performed by a HR specialist.
These roles and the model are presented in the support conspectus.
Here we can talk about the standard things that we are used to.
This is planning and selection of staff, management of rewards,
assistance to the employee when he comes to the staff service and tells his problems,
this is the relationship with public and state bodies of control and management in the field of staff,
but there are also those areas that are currently developing at many enterprises.
For example, at many enterprises, it is now quite relevant to introduce systems for managing the effectiveness of activities.
Or those companies, as a rule, large companies,
which build their system, their activities, planning and development of staff,
there are usually corporate universities or training centers.
All this is the role that specialists in staff management are forced to perform.
At the same time, the staff service creates a valuable offer in its activities,
and this is an important factor in reviewing the position of the HR service and its manager in business,
that is, the perception of the manager of the staff management service as a business partner.
In its activities, when the company implements its strategic goals,
when the task and goals of the staff service are formed,
its activities are assessed from the position of efficiency and value for the business.
For example, when we talk about the fact that the HR service should take into account the external and internal environment with which it works,
we are talking about the fact that the value that the HR service creates is that,
based on the analysis of the external market, for example, benchmarking,
the HR service can adapt and implement the best practices that exist at other enterprises,
and best distribute resources.
When we talk about the fact that the task of the HR service is to comply with the interests of internal and external clients,
we are talking about the fact that within this activity, within this task,
the HR service creates non-material values, increases the client share,
expands organizational capabilities that are so necessary for the company's linear manager.
When we talk about creating a staff management system,
we mean that the HR service and its employees should be engaged in process management,
of course, those that are related to the staff.
They should be engaged in procedures and mechanisms of managing the efficiency of work,
connecting this with the achievement of the company's business goals.
On the other hand, the development of the staff is also a very important task,
and here we are talking about strategic planning in accordance with the company's tasks.
And finally, the HR service itself should also develop, and professionals should work in it.
Therefore, the training and development of employees of the staff management service is also an important task of its manager.
If we show the place where the staff management system is located in the general system of company management,
then, as you can see on the slide, we can say that, on the one hand,
the company develops a business strategy, vision, and mission.
In order to track the company's goals, mechanisms and tools such as a balanced system of indicators,
or goal management, or indicators of efficiency of activity are used,
which are then integrated into the organizational culture of the company by the staff management system.
At the same time, there is a kind of redistribution of roles.
If earlier the line managers perceived the department or the staff management service as the unit that serves them,
then at the moment more and more functions related to the development of the staff are switched to the line manager.
So, the HR service is engaged in selection, development, planning, budgeting for the staff.
Line managers manage the results, track the payment chain for incentives, and train and develop the staff.
Naturally, the staff and the working groups that are represented in the company report on their activities to the managers and are serviced by the HR service.
When we talk about the HR service organization, we mean that various functions that it can perform can be organized in different ways.
It can be performed by the HR service itself, by its specialists, it can be outsourced.
In 1991, Mr. Adams was given four approaches to human resources management.
He considered the staff service as an internal agency.
Then this center was considered as an internal consulting service for the company.
Then the HR service sells its services to all other departments.
But other departments have some freedom.
They can apply not only to their HR service, but also to any other provider.
For example, to training.
Finally, the third approach to the HR service organization was given by Mr. Adams to the enterprise within the enterprise.
Here, the emphasis is changed.
Yes, of course, internal departments can buy services, buy in quotation marks, services of the HR service.
But the HR service is practically a free, independent structural unit.
It can go to the market and, accordingly, provide services to other companies on the open market, on the external market.
In particular, large holdings where famous universities, corporate universities are created, are engaged in this.
External consulting group is another approach to the construction of the HR service.
When, in principle, all the activity of the HR service is transferred to outsourcing, to external providers.
Of course, all these approaches are implemented today on the Russian market.
But each company chooses the most convenient way for itself.
However, we observe a common feature, characteristic of any organization.
The fact is that the service and services for HR are paid.
They are paid for internal departments, they are paid for external providers.
At the same time, there is another approach, when it is not only about how the HR service is organized,
who it is, whether it is free or not very free at the enterprise.
And also when the main roles that this department performs in the company and its head are assessed.
In particular, Dave Ullrich highlighted four main roles of a modern HR director.
First of all, it is a business partner.
This is a business partner of other top managers who participate in determining the strategy of the company,
vision of the future and organization of development.
And in fact, they participate in all these processes.
Moreover, if we look at Russian companies, then in many companies where partnerships are adopted, HR becomes a partner.
A classic example that I can give right now is the well-known company BDO Unicorn in the consulting circles,
in which the head of the HR service is a business partner.
The second role that the HR service performs is a role related to the support of processes,
contributing to the implementation of organizational transformations in the company,
and, accordingly, to the support of those actions in the direction of the development of the company,
in which he participated as a business partner.
The third role is infrastructure,
because it is very important to build effective and successful business processes in the company.
And finally, the HR service is a guarantor of loyalty and commitment of employees.
These processes contribute to the awareness of employees and the desire of the employee to work in this company,
to trust these managers, and, accordingly, this contributes to the growth of the company itself.
Now, please, complete the task for this topic, which is presented in your workbooks.
The next topic is HR strategy.
When we talk about the development of the HR service,
about its importance at the moment in the company,
about this topic, we should remember that the HR strategy is a very important part of the company.
And when we talk about the real moment in the company,
about the value that the specialists of this service create,
we understand that all their activity is associated with the achievement of the strategy and strategic goals that are set before the company.
And, of course, if we take Russian companies,
not all of them have a formalized strategy.
Not all of them have a formalized strategy,
which is really what tasks are in front of them and what they want to achieve.
Sometimes it's just a piece of paper that lies on the shelf.
Moreover, even if there is a strategy,
and this is exactly what the owners and employees of the company want to achieve,
only 33% of HR services associate their activity with the company's strategy.
Only 34% of companies perceive the HR service as a business partner.
Only 23% of companies include the development of such a functional strategy as the HR strategy in the strategic planning process.
At the same time, you know the pyramid of strategies.
At the top there is a corporate strategy, at the bottom there is an operational strategy, and somewhere in the middle there is a functional strategy.
These are the strategies that are developed for functional areas.
One of these functional areas is the management of HR,
management of human resources.
Of course, there should be a connection between the coordination from top to bottom,
that is, from the corporate strategy, the business strategy of the company, to the functional strategy.
That is, every goal that was developed and set for the company
should be transformed into a goal that will be achieved by the functional direction of the company,
the direction of HR.
On the one hand.
On the other hand, in addition to such vertical integration, horizontal integration is also necessary.
We understand that in order to make it clear where to move in the area of human resources management,
that is, the HR strategy has been developed,
we need those subsections of it, which are commonly called instrumental strategies,
the reward system strategy, the recruitment hiring strategy, the adaptation strategy of the staff,
the management strategy, efficiency, and so on, so that they are also coordinated.
In order to avoid the following situation in life,
a crocodile in one direction, a pike in the other, a swan in the third, in heaven.
The fact is that the achievement of this coordination, integration, and congruence,
can be called in different ways, requires certain actions from the service side.
Namely, if we are talking about vertical integration,
then here, at least, we need to understand what strategic goals are in front of the company.
It is not easy to understand.
You also need to know what skills and what behavior are required from the staff
so that the company's strategy is achieved, is implemented.
In addition, you need to have some skills in technologies
that will allow us to achieve the corresponding behavior from the people who work in our company,
and will allow us to develop the required skills that are required for the implementation of the business strategy.
And since the process of strategic planning and the process of developing a strategy is a permanent process,
it is constant.
It is not in vain that they say that as soon as the strategy is developed,
then we start developing it again.
It cannot be developed for centuries.
Therefore, it turns out that another necessary condition for integration
is the ability to quickly implement the desired technologies,
to quickly change the way the company lives.
And this, again, is a problem related to human resources management,
and a problem related to the fact that we, as people, all do not like uncertainty.
We all want to know what will happen tomorrow.
When changes occur, what will happen tomorrow, we can only assume.
And this means that we begin to resist.
And this is another of the tasks that are before the staff management service.
How does horizontal coordination achieve?
And why is it necessary?
I have already said that horizontal coordination is necessary for all the strategies of the instrumental nature
that is used by the staff management service to support each other.
This can only be achieved if we tie them together.
In fact, this is the translation of the term
– tying together.
And for this we need, again, to analyze the needs and features of the company,
to assess how HR strategy can satisfy the needs and features of the company.
We need to find and identify the behavior that is required of the employees.
We need to assess the practice that we are using now,
to find difficulties, deviations,
and, most importantly, to decide on the main point
that will be the connecting line of all instrumental strategies.
For example, we say that each of the strategies will use, for example, efficiency indicators.
Okay. If this is so, then we must assume.
For example, we want to become a leader in costs.
Therefore, we need to reduce these costs,
to conduct certain activities that will lead to a reduction in costs.
For this, we introduce efficiency indicators.
We want our people to work more effectively.
Then we start to consider instrumental strategies.
In order not only to integrate the functional management strategy of the staff
with the business strategy of the company vertically, but also horizontally.
Therefore, what do we do next?
We look at how we need to select the staff.
We need to select the staff so that he can use the system of indicators,
so that his skills correspond to what he will be asked.
If we are talking about rewards,
then we should have a certain bonus pool,
which we will distribute among employees in the form of bonuses,
that is, a variable part of the wage,
using efficiency indicators and their assessment.
How will we build a staff reserve?
Based on the results that the analysis and audit of the system of indicators will show us.
Accordingly, we connect each instrumental strategy horizontally,
we string it on a single technology.
Consequently, each of our actions will be strengthened,
will be carried out in the same direction,
there will be no contradictions.
At the same time, note that when we have developed a strategy,
we must answer the question,
is it good, is it applicable?
For this, some criteria are needed for assessment.
There are many such criteria,
but if you try to combine them,
you can see the following on the slide.
You must answer a number of questions positively.
The first question is whether the management strategy contributes to the implementation of the business strategy.
The second question is whether it manages the company's values,
whether it strengthens them.
The third question is whether it is based on diagnostic analysis.
The fourth question is whether it explains how the company's needs will be satisfied.
Has the assessment of the costs and results been carried out?
Next, is this strategy profitable?
And finally, are the processes that are embedded in the staff management strategy,
communication programs, efficiency management, and so on.
At the same time, any negative answer leads to the fact that the strategy cannot be implemented.
It is detached from life.
For example, one of the metallurgical companies began to develop a staff management strategy.
At the same time, as is usually the case,
the process of diagnosis was carried out by the management.
We know ourselves.
As a result, we got a beautiful strategy from the textbook.
We wrote what we would like to be.
But the methods that we have laid down in the strategy,
the strategy actually implies a fairly simple set.
What we want to be, what we are, the starting point and the end point,
where we need to go, and the path.
So, due to the fact that it was not clear where we were going,
the diagnosis was not carried out, the path was definitely not the right one.
And the beautiful picture of the future of the company,
alas, was not achieved.
Although, a year later, an audit was conducted of what the company should have been.
And it turned out that many of the actions that were laid down in the staff development program
did not bring any results.
It was money thrown in the wind.
Another example.
The most famous telecommunications company, the Russian company,
decided that it was necessary to develop a staff management strategy.
A huge budget was allocated.
Only the business strategy was not yet formalized,
not yet designed in the process of the idea of the owners.
It was even in the heads of the owners.
Only to their subordinates and top managers they did not convey.
Accordingly, they could only guess what the owner wanted,
and where we were going.
As a result, the guess was unsuccessful.
When the owner was presented with a strategy of managing human resources,
it turned out that the owner was doing everything differently,
simply because the goals of the business were completely different.
Let's move on.
When we develop a strategy, we need to take into account a number of factors.
These factors, as I said, can be divided into external and internal.
On the one hand, this is the position of the company in the market,
as an example of an external factor.
The presence of specialists in the field of management in the market.
Demand and supply in the labor market.
On the other hand, this is a number of internal factors.
The policy of investment in human capital.
The size, age of the company, its history, its values, its goals,
its organizational culture, and finally, the personality of the manager.
And, of course, which specialists our staff consists of.
All these factors should be taken into account when developing a strategy of managing human resources.
Let's see how the age of the company can affect the strategy.
First, the business strategy, and then, of course, the strategy of managing staff.
In the diagrams presented in your support conspectus,
there is a model developed by Greiner,
which takes into account the dependence between the age of the organization,
its size, and what is happening in it.
Greiner highlights five types of practice.
Five stages that any company goes through in its development.
Growth through creativity, management, delegation, coordination, and cooperation.
In fact, there are quite a few models that take into account the age of the company,
and that link the age of the company, its size, with the strategy that is implemented in it.
For example, a similar model can be called the Azizos model.
But the most important thing in these models is that at each stage of development
a certain organizational structure is assigned, a certain control system,
certain crisis stages are identified, how they are accompanied,
and certain strategic management tasks can be assigned to each stage.
Let's see.
So, growth through creativity.
At this stage, the company is in the infancy stage.
The company management is busy promoting a new product to the market.
The main task is to produce and sell them.
Accordingly, organizational culture is informal.
Everyone often communicates with each other creatively, referring to a new product.
And the management style?
It is individualistic, it is entrepreneurial.
The control system is only based on market results.
Reward?
The reward is not great.
Basically, it is the future.
For example, the message is that if the company is successful,
it will be a participation in the profit, participation in the property.
When the infancy stage and growth through creativity reaches its peak,
a crisis can occur.
A crisis associated with the market vulnerability of the company,
because there is no time for the company's own management system and hands do not reach.
This crisis is accompanied by the fact that the company is growing,
and the management is not effective.
Here the main task of the head of staff management,
which in fact in such companies may not be,
due to the fact that the company is still small, small in size.
And the functions of the management of the staff are distributed among many managers.
As a result, what do we have?
We have a situation when it is necessary to switch to professional management,
the company has grown to this size,
and it is necessary to delegate power, which is quite difficult to do.
If the company overcomes the crisis of market vulnerability,
it goes to the next stage, the stage of the management.
Here the priority is on the company's management system,
on the effectiveness of the operations that are carried out in the company.
A functional or centralized organizational structure is introduced.
It is hierarchical, respectively,
this creates the need for a direct management.
Control is carried out through introduced standards,
which are quite strict, and through the control of costs.
Each unit is the center of costs,
and the budgets that are lowered and their implementation are controlled in each unit.
As a rule, the reward system in such companies is related to the deposit system.
And the deposits, the increase of the reward that the manager receives,
can be carried out for the company's merits.
And here, at a certain stage, a crisis may also arise,
which is accompanied by an ineffective management middle management.
As a rule, this is due to a sharp transition to professional management.
Accordingly, the policy in the area of personnel management,
management of human resources, should be aimed at structuring the authorities.
And we enter the stage of delegation.
The third stage of the company's development.
The company is already large.
The company is able to win the share of the market.
As a rule, the strategy of geographical expansion is pursued here.
That is, to win the share of the market.
Such companies are decentralized and built on a geographical principle.
There is a head company, which is located for Russian practice in Moscow,
and many branches, factories scattered throughout other cities and cities.
Therefore, the head must delegate authority to the places,
in order to make operational decisions there.
Control of reports and profits.
Each such structural unit is perceived by the management as a center of profit.
Reward for the profit, for bringing this profit to the organization,
means a bonus system.
But here, too, a crisis may arise at a certain stage.
A crisis associated with autonomy, loss of control,
with the emergence of corporate conflicts.
The task of HR is to build a decentralized system and delegate authority.
The company is growing.
It has overcome this crisis and entered the coordination stage.
The company is consolidated.
As a rule, in this case, the organizational structure becomes linear-staff.
There is a large managing company with a large number of staff.
The managing company is provided with marketing functions,
staff management functions, financial, and so on.
Accordingly, this managing company for geographically distant business units
acts as a watchdog.
The system of control.
We create a plan.
We allocate investments.
And then the assessment as an investment project.
Be kind, return the investments.
And with an increase.
And, accordingly, management of the plan of fact analysis.
The emphasis of the reward is made on the participation in the profits.
And, in fact, on some options,
if the company is able to provide shares,
either natural or virtual,
if the company has not yet entered the IPO.
With the growth of the company at this stage,
there may be a crisis of control and management.
It is accompanied by the fact that as a result of decentralization,
we observe that business units are trying to break free.
Here, the task of the staff management unit
is to build a coordination system of actions,
coordination of the center, coordination of business units.
And finally, the stage of cooperation.
In principle, the priority of management is innovation.
Innovation.
As a rule, a matrix structure is used here.
The matrix of teams.
Teams that solve certain problems.
Then the style of management becomes participatory.
And control?
Control is that a common goal is set for each team.
This common goal the team has either achieved or not.
And, of course, the emphasis of the reward is made on
to encourage the team as a whole.
Well, then the team will figure it out somehow.
So team bonuses.
However, a crisis may arise here.
This is a crisis of trust.
Trust of the team to the management.
Trust within the team.
The team can, if it does not trust the management,
can simply leave the company.
Especially since the Russian market is known for the practice of buying heads.
Buying whole teams.
We'll talk about this later today.
On the other hand,
motivation decreases, flexibility decreases,
and the team can simply disperse,
run in different directions.
A classic example.
How did the trust crisis arise in one of the companies?
Four people.
Four big friends.
Four owners.
The team works together for a long time.
The business is developing.
There comes a stage when
some innovative idea is needed.
They did not hear each other.
Moreover,
a trust crisis arose between them.
One of the team members
starts to open a new business in parallel.
There he tries to implement those innovative ideas
that were not heard by the team.
As a result,
he is removed from the business,
and the team is broken up.
The company is on the verge of bankruptcy.
Moreover,
the two owners left in the business
are in a state of paranoia.
They are afraid that their business will be seized
by their former friends,
associates, and team members.
So, what can be done here?
What is the task of the head of the personnel
as a business partner?
To build cooperation.
To build bridges
to overcome this crisis.
Please note that
in the support conspectus
the linear model of Greiner
is not really linear.
It has declines and rises.
It is cyclic.
And nothing else develops in our life.
There are declines and rises.
With any rise,
you can, accordingly, go down.
You can go bankrupt.
Whatever happens,
we say that we need to find a way out of the crisis.
Moreover,
each of the stages allocated by Greiner
is characterized by certain rules
of building HR services.
Even not rules, but structures
that are typical for each of the stages.
At the stage of growth through creativity,
I have already talked about it,
the manager may be absent.
Or he will be alone.
If he is alone,
he performs absolutely all functions
that are assigned to this service.
If he is absent,
the functions are redistributed among the linear managers.
At the stage of the executive management,
the staff is formed according to the functional characteristic.
At the stage of delegation and coordination,
the staff is assigned the duty
to develop the strategy of managing staff
and corporate ideology.
Special attention is given to working with corporate culture.
If we look at the research
conducted by the consulting company COPSI,
the survey of large companies
showed that the technologies
that the staff management service uses
are based on the level of its development
and the stage at which this company is located.
So, if we talk about the stage
that is typical for the storm growth,
then, as a rule,
the technology of the set is used here.
Technologies related to the promotion of staff are used,
first of all.
When the company is at the stage of stability,
technologies related to the system of payments,
that is, the management of rewards,
and training of staff attestation
are used first.
And finally, at the stage of the crisis,
the reward system
and the rule of dismissal of staff are used.
But we return to the connection
between business strategy
and the functional strategy of managing human resources.
Depending on which business strategy
the company chooses to implement,
we say that different functions of human staff management
will imply a different set of events
and a different tool.
In particular, we will start with the classification of strategies,
business strategies,
which Michael Porter proposed.
Let's assume that the company implements an innovation strategy.
This means the achievement of competitive advantage through innovation.
This means that it has already reached the stage of cooperation.
For example,
a company engaged in colored metals
is a company that has already been in cooperation
with a company that has already been in cooperation
with a fairly large network of dealers.
They reach the stage of development
when they need to implement innovations,
and only at this point
they are able to seize some more part of the market.
In principle, a fairly large company
occupies about 35% of the market today.
What is proposed?
The company is proposed to introduce a so-called project office
so that any employee can propose a project
or the idea of the project,
which would be interesting for the company,
which could develop the company in the future.
What is the function of human resources management?
In terms of resource provision,
we must recruit and retain staff
who are inclined to innovations.
This means highly qualified employees
who have a rich enough experience of working in this area.
This is a certain technology of hiring.
When we talk about resource development,
we must develop people's strategic abilities,
we must increase their opportunities in the innovative sphere,
we must increase the intellectual capital of the company.
This means we must introduce a knowledge management system.
In the area of reward,
we must provide some financial incentives
for employees to participate in innovative activities.
In addition to financial incentives,
in addition to monetary motivation,
non-monetary motivation must be implemented.
A simple thank you from the manager
is a huge incentive for any person.
This means that I am valued here,
I am needed by this company.
If we talk about another type of strategy,
which was allocated by Michael Porter,
the achievement of competitive advantage through quality improvement,
then other tasks of human resources management will be pursued here.
An example of such a strategy can be given
based on the experience of introducing a quality management system.
When is it done?
It is done at the stage of conquering new markets,
which are already well divided,
and, in principle, it is necessary to be different from other companies,
which are presented on this market.
And this means differentiation,
differentiation, including in the area of quality.
On the other hand,
as a rule, the quality systems are occupied by companies,
which are going to enter the Western market.
Everything is fine with competition there.
One of the companies that I would like to give as an example
is a company engaged in the production of packaging.
Anyone can make packaging.
And packaging is actually presented with quite strict quality requirements.
A company operating in the regional market,
in the Russian regional market,
introduces a quality system,
trying to be in a more advantageous position
compared to others,
including companies that came from St. Petersburg and Moscow.
What is the task of the head of staff?
In terms of resource provision,
such personnel selection procedures should be used,
which could identify employees
providing the most likely quality of production in the process of work.
In terms of resources, their development,
it is necessary for the organization to become self-educating.
It is necessary for the company to have a mentoring system.
A special emphasis should be placed on professional training
within the framework of the concept of quality management.
It is necessary to train customer orientation.
One study was conducted on customer orientation.
Among banks, we took a lot of corporate culture of Western companies.
Offices, dress code, but we did not take the most important thing.
Customer orientation.
When you call a bank and you may not receive an answer to your question.
When you come and stand in line.
When you address and understand that you are addressing in vain.
When you make a request and get an answer,
you need it today.
Let's say, in a week, if they remember.
And if they do not remember, then only after the reminder,
and a week later.
It is clear that in this case,
it is not necessary to talk about the quality of service.
As it is not paradoxical,
the study conducted showed this.
I mean our banking sphere.
In the area of ​​rewards,
it is necessary to agree on rewards and quality indicators.
The system of quality management, including ISO,
assumes that each process will be allocated several quality indicators.
And of course, they can be taken into account in the labor payment system.
Let's move on to the next strategy.
Leadership in costs.
This is a fairly characteristic strategy for most large companies,
especially in mass production.
Here, competitive advantage is achieved through the optimization of costs.
In fact, through an attempt to minimize them.
And here, the main thing, again,
is that the functional strategy of managing human resources
does not contradict the one that is declared as a business strategy.
I will give an example.
The telecommunications monopolist of the Russian market.
We will not name his name.
Everyone has already guessed.
He is going to lead in costs
and, accordingly, tries to minimize them.
A decision is made on a significant reduction in costs.
A decision is made on the automation of many processes.
Super good.
However, in order to automate something,
you need to create a service that will serve the IT system
that is engaged in the automation of processes.
Great.
But these are people.
As a result, the company,
the unit created when the IT system is introduced,
grabs the head,
because there is a strategy of reducing the number.
One of the events is implemented.
The second event is the opposite of the implementation of the IT system
that requires people.
There is a conflict.
A conflict between the units inside this company.
But the solution was found.
Consultants were invited,
who began to try to justify the number, its increase.
As a result, both goals were achieved in some way.
But they were contradictory.
What is the task of HR service?
In the area of resource provision,
we must select the staff in the cheapest way.
This means that we select it in the center,
where the managing company is located,
and in the regions.
In the regions, we know that they are cheaper.
On the other hand,
we must try to find employees on the market
with a high added value.
We must plan and carry out a reduction of staff.
In fact, we must plan human resources.
This means that we must understand who we need to hire,
how many people will leave the production process
due to dismissals, due to other reasons.
And finally, we must understand the reasons
why we acquire or lose staff.
In the area of resource development,
we must carry out training
aimed at increasing the productivity of the labor,
on the effectiveness and effectiveness of the labor.
In the area of reward,
we must ensure the value of invested funds.
Therefore, we must optimize unnecessary costs,
we must introduce an efficiency management system,
either a system for goal management
or a system for performance management.
The next type of business strategy
is the strategy of buying heads.
We buy a ready team.
Therefore, we save on preparing staff,
but we must invest in maintaining this team
to get the added value that they can bring to us.
Resources provision.
The selection procedure will be difficult,
because we need to find the team,
persuade the team that is ready to move on.
In the area of resource development,
self-training is necessary.
This can be done through assessment,
building a competence model,
and, based on this, building personal development plans.
This is a mentorship system.
We inform the company's involvement and commitment
on behalf of the team that we have bought.
In the area of reward,
we must introduce performance management
and ensure competitive salary,
not lower than market.
This is often assumed by grading.
As an example, we can give a situation
of buying a team of managers of the Ashan trading network
with a cross-stitching X5 Retail,
or buying a team of managers from Eldorado in Technosil.
Another example is a consulting company BDO Unicorn,
which lost a large percentage of its high-class team
due to the fact that another company,
which decided to implement consultative services,
CompuLink, bought the team.
Here we need to say that it is possible to buy a team.
We all cost something.
Someone more, someone less.
Here we need to say that the team,
which has passed once,
must be kept.
We have encountered cases on the market
when such a transition is carried out by the team annually
in order to raise bonuses.
In any case, there are a number of goals before the HR service.
Improve performance,
expand the base of professional skills,
ensure the development of competence,
career growth.
There are 6 such goals.
These goals are presented in your support consulting.
Each goal is considered through a set of functional measures.
Functional measures are allocated,
providing resources,
development of human resources and rewards.
Accordingly, in each of the presented sets of measures
we track the horizontal and vertical integration.
Let's move on to the next topic.
Evaluation of the efficiency of the HR system.
For the owner, as I said at the very beginning,
it is very important to increase the value of the business.
And it would be good to speak his language with the owner.
That is, with financial categories.
It is easier for the owner to understand these categories.
To do this, new methods are introduced
in the system of assessment of the efficiency of the HR system.
One of these methods is the use of ROI methodology.
ROI is the financial indicator of return on investment.
From the perspective of this methodology,
it is necessary to assess the reaction of participants and the planned actions.
Here we measure the level of satisfaction with programs
and the level of performance for planned actions.
Next is training.
We measure training in the changes that occurred
with the listener in knowledge, skills, and settings.
Then the application.
We measure changes in behavior at work.
And finally, the impact on business and return on investment.
Impact on business.
We measure changes in business indicators.
Here we use indicators that are used
to assess the achievement of the business goal.
Return on investment.
We compare the benefits of a particular program project
with the costs of this program.
In principle, the methodology is very simple, very convenient.
And it looks like this in practice.
We introduce a new stimulation system.
We introduce a career development system.
Accordingly, we reduce the flow of staff.
In addition, we also have a program for training employees and mentors.
Consequently, we increase the qualification, competence,
and performance of the employees' work.
All this is non-material assets,
and in principle, non-material assets can be assessed.
We look at what happens to our company
after a certain period of time.
Let's say, in a year.
We say that our programs, which we implemented,
gave us the opportunity to achieve growth in income.
Through the fact that we have improved our system,
through the fact that we can now make more perfect decisions,
the internal consumer is more satisfied with the activity of the staff management service.
All this is a material asset.
Consequently, we assess the income we received in a year
with the investments we invested in at the beginning.
That is, from the attitude of income to investments.
With this indicator, we can go to the owner and say,
here are the profits from our programs.
Everything would be fine.
And the owner will definitely like this indicator.
But it is difficult to assess it in fact.
It is especially difficult to assess it for the practice of human resources management.
This is a non-material asset.
A non-material asset means that there are difficulties in the assessment.
This is a separate big topic, which you will certainly consider.
Such an assessment gives a very big error.
But this is not all.
You can also accept the error.
Imagine that in addition to these projects,
there are a number of projects in the company,
which are also aimed at changing non-material assets.
The CRM is being implemented.
Another program is being implemented.
At the same time, we understand that in fact,
there are two or three programs, and everything else is money thrown into the air.
And this is impossible to track.
We cannot distinguish the influence of a particular program
on the development of a career,
how it affected the income,
what percentage it made.
As a result, the error increases.
And we understand that we need to move not only to such financial indicators.
According to Dave Ulrich and other leading economists in the field of strategic management,
the efficiency of the staff management system can be measured
in the same way as we assess the activities of a non-commercial organization.
By the binary principle.
Did it? Did not do it.
Did it?
Built a corporate university.
Did a mentoring system.
Did it?
Conducted 5 trainings.
Well, if you did not conduct, did not adapt, did not implement,
did not implement the adaptation system or did not do anything else,
then the error is bad.
Then we can use the tool of implementation of the strategy,
for example, associated with the indicators of efficiency of the KPI.
In this case, we need to take a strategic map
made for the company,
look at the goals that are designated for the company as a whole
and allocated to a separate perspective of the staff,
and try to further decompose them
so that the separate specialists of the staff management service
can take these goals on themselves.
That is, if we have a goal marked in front of the department,
then now we bring this goal to each structure of our department,
and then to each employee of the department.
For example, look at the strategic map of HR,
developed for a credit organization.
You have it in the support conspectus and here.
This is a map with a decomposition
for the staff management department.
So, we took a few other perspectives
than the standard ones offered by Norton and Kaplan.
We are developing for the department.
So, we have the perspectives of the owners and shareholders.
Of course, they are interested in the financial sphere,
so here we allocate tasks related to increasing the company's income
and maximizing the ROI for the staff.
On the other hand, we have the perspectives of internal processes,
which the staff management service should deal with.
We have the perspectives of development and growth.
In these perspectives, we reflect the goals and tasks
that are in front of our department.
We have one common goal, and we decompose it into smaller ones.
We take one of them and try to add efficiency indicators
for each goal, which we can use to evaluate its implementation.
For example, let's take the goal of maintaining the staff,
which we have set for our department.
We can measure the achievement of this goal with various indicators.
I will give you a few examples.
For example, the costs for the liquidity,
or the liquidity of the staff in a certain category of positions,
or the coefficient of retention of critically important employees.
These can also be indicators that we take with the help of surveyors and surveys.
For example, the results of the survey show how good the company is
as an employer from the employees' point of view.
How do they evaluate it?
Of course, every indicator that we track should be calculated.
For example, the costs for the liquidity.
We calculate the costs for the selection of new employees
and their level of competence, plus the lost benefit
from the fact that this or that initiative cannot be implemented
due to the fact that the one who could implement it simply left the company.
There is another model that allows us to measure the level of efficiency
and efficiency of the company.
The staff management service.
It is called the 6C model.
In accordance with the first letters,
there are 6 words that denote the directions in which the measurement should be made.
These are the blocks that can be entered into the staff management service's indicators.
First, and this is probably the most important thing,
the level of efficiency of the HR.
The level of consciousness, the satisfaction of internal customers,
in the first place, we are talking about linear managers,
corporate culture, control of costs, and contribution to the improvement of business indicators.
This 6C model can be presented in the form of a pyramid.
We are all fond of pyramids, as well as managers.
This is the pyramid of HR efficiency.
It is an analogue of the Maslow pyramid, the pyramid of needs.
At the bottom, there is physiology, which is necessary in any case.
At the top, there is what you should strive for and what is achieved only if we have a basis,
if the previous level has been reached.
So, the basis of the pyramid is the compliance with the legislation.
Next, processes and their optimization from the point of view of cost control and quality assurance.
Next, business indicators and, finally, strategic goals and compliance with the policy that the HR service implements.
These are the strategic goals.
Thus, we can compile all the indicators of the efficiency of the HR service in blocks.
Organizational, quality of services of the HR service, behavior of employees and achievement of goals.
Let's take a closer look at each of these blocks.
The indicators of the efficiency of the HR service are related to the organizational block.
It can include the added cost per employee, the profit per employee, the volume of sales per employee, the costs per employee, and so on.
In principle, these are indicators that bear a soulful character, determining the optimal number of staff.
The next block is related to the assessment of the level of services of the HR service.
It includes the average time of filling out the vacancies, the time of answering the question from one of the departments,
the costs for advertising about the set compared to the number of contracts.
The next block is related to the formation of a certain behavior of the employees.
This block can be attributed to the costs saved as a result of the proposals created using the procedures developed by the HR service.
The development group or project groups.
It can be the number of appeals to court, for example, on the issue of dismissal.
It can be the number of non-workings.
We assess in quantitative ways the level of behavior that we would like to achieve in our company.
Here, by the way, can be an indicator of the number of fines imposed.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that according to Russian legislation, there can be no fines.
The next block is related to the achievement of the goal.
If we have taken on a task, then we must fulfill the established deadlines.
This can serve as an indicator of the effectiveness of the goal.
Satisfaction.
Evaluation of internal customer feedback.
Conducting surveys related to the work indicators and the formation of adherence to the indicators.
The results of the attestation.
For example, the number of appeals that we had to remove according to the results of the attestation.
All this can serve as an indicator of the effectiveness of the goals set before the staff management service.
The goal of the staff management service is to ensure that the employees are satisfied with the results of the work.
Thus, colleagues, we have considered the introductory part of the course on human resources management.
I ask you to fill out the form provided in your support consulting, answering the questions provided at the end of the text.
Thank you very much for your attention.